Quality statement 3: Assessment for long‑term oxygen therapy {.title}
------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement {.title}

People with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and a
persistent resting stable oxygen saturation level of 92% or less have
their arterial blood gases measured to assess whether they need
long‑term oxygen therapy (LTOT). **[2011, updated 2016]**

### Rationale {.title}

LTOT is used to treat people with stable COPD who have developed daytime
hypoxaemia. People with COPD and a persistent resting stable oxygen
saturation of 92% or less should be assessed for their suitability for
LTOT, which can improve survival, pulmonary haemodynamics, polycythaemia
and neuropsychological health.

### Quality measures {.title}

#### Structure {.title}

Evidence of local arrangements and written clinical protocols to ensure
that people with stable COPD and a persistent resting stable oxygen
saturation level of 92% or less have their arterial blood gases measured
to assess whether they need LTOT.

***Data source:*** Local data collection Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

#### Process {.title}

Proportion of people with stable COPD and a persistent resting stable
oxygen saturation level of 92% or less who have their arterial blood
gases measured to assess whether they need LTOT.

Numerator – the number in the denominator who have their arterial blood
gases measured to assess whether they need LTOT.

Denominator – the number of people with stable COPD and a persistent
resting stable oxygen saturation level of 92% or less.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

#### Outcome {.title}

​a) Hospital admission for acute exacerbation.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

​b) Quality of life.

***Data source*** **:** Local data collection.

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners {.title}

**Service providers** (primary and secondary care services) ensure that
systems are in place for people with stable COPD and a persistent
resting oxygen saturation level of 92% or less to have their arterial
blood gases measured to assess whether they need LTOT.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure that they measure the arterial blood
gases of people with stable COPD and a persisting resting oxygen
saturation level of 92% or less to assess whether they need LTOT.

**Commissioners** (clinical commissioning groups) ensure that they
commission services in which people with stable COPD and a persisting
resting oxygen saturation level of 92% or less have their arterial blood
gases measured to assess whether they need LTOT.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers {.title}

**People with COPD** **that is stable and who have low levels of oxygen
in their blood (when checked using a device that clips to their
finger)** have this confirmed by a blood test, to assess whether they
need long‑term oxygen therapy. Long‑term oxygen therapy is treatment
with oxygen breathed in through a tube (placed just inside the nose) or
a mask connected to an oxygen supply. It is usually given for at least
15 hours during the day or night.

### Source guidance {.title}

-   [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
    disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (2010) NICE
    guideline CG101, recommendation 1.2.5.4

-   British Thoracic Society (2015) [Guidelines for home oxygen use in
    adults,](https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/guidelines-and-quality-standards/home-oxygen-guideline-adults/)
    Referral and assessment of patients for LTOT, page i11, bullet point
    5

### Definitions {.title}

#### Long‑term oxygen therapy (LTOT) {.title}

The provision of oxygen therapy for continuous use at home, usually
given for at least 15 hours during the day or night.

[Adapted from [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)]

#### Assessment for LTOT {.title}

Assessing people for LTOT should comprise measuring arterial blood gases
on 2 occasions at least 3 weeks apart in people who have a confident
diagnosis of COPD, who are receiving optimum medical management and
whose COPD is stable.

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)
recommendation 1.2.5.6]

#### Stable COPD {.title}

The absence of any of the features of a recent acute exacerbation, such
as worsening breathlessness, cough, increased sputum production and
change in colour of sputum.

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)
recommendation 1.3.1]

#### Persistent resting stable oxygen saturation {.title}

An oxygen saturation (measured with a pulse oximeter) that is
persistently 92% or less when the person is in a chronic stable state
and is at rest (is not, and has not recently, been exercising).

[Expert opinion]


