Quality statement 2: Inhaler technique {.title}
--------------------------------------

### Quality statement {.title}

People with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) who are
prescribed an inhaler have their inhaler technique assessed when
starting treatment and then regularly during treatment. **[2011, updated
2016]**

### Rationale {.title}

Bronchodilator therapy is usually delivered using a hand‑held inhaler
device. People with COPD need to use their inhaler correctly to receive
the optimal treatment dose. Assessing inhaler technique should happen at
the first prescription once a person has been taught the correct
technique, and then be reassessed regularly (for example, at their
annual review, if their treatment changes or after an acute
exacerbation) throughout the duration of a person's treatment in
primary, community and secondary care services.

### Quality measures {.title}

#### Structure {.title}

​a) Evidence of local arrangements and written clinical protocols to
ensure that people with COPD who are prescribed an inhaler have their
technique assessed at the start of treatment and then regularly during
their treatment.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​b) Evidence of local arrangements and written clinical protocols to
ensure that healthcare professionals in primary, community and secondary
care services are trained and competent in teaching inhaler technique.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

#### Process {.title}

​a) Proportion of people with COPD prescribed an inhaler who have their
inhaler technique assessed at the start of treatment.

Numerator – the number in the denominator who have their inhaler
technique assessed at the start of treatment.

Denominator – the number of people with COPD prescribed an inhaler.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​b) Proportion of people with COPD prescribed an inhaler who have their
inhaler technique assessed at their annual review.

Numerator – the number in the denominator whose last inhaler annual
review was no longer than 12 months since the previous one or since
inhaler initiation.

Denominator – the number of people with COPD prescribed an inhaler for
more than 12 months.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​c) Proportion of people with COPD prescribed an inhaler who have their
inhaler technique assessed after a change in treatment.

Numerator – the number in the denominator who had their inhaler
technique assessed after a change in treatment.

Denominator – the number of people with COPD prescribed an inhaler who
have had their inhaler changed.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​d) Proportion of people with COPD prescribed an inhaler who have their
inhaler technique assessed after an acute exacerbation.

Numerator – the number in the denominator who had their inhaler
technique assessed after an acute exacerbation.

Denominator – the number of people with COPD prescribed an inhaler who
have had an acute exacerbation.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

#### Outcome {.title}

​a) Exacerbation rates.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​b) Hospital admissions.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners {.title}

**Service providers** (primary care services, community services and
secondary care services) ensure that systems are in place and healthcare
professionals are trained and competent to teach people with COPD who
are prescribed an inhaler the correct inhaler technique and to assess
their inhaler technique when starting treatment and regularly during
their treatment.

**Healthcare professionals** (nurses, GPs, secondary care doctors,
physiotherapists, occupational therapists and pharmacists) ensure that
they provide training in the correct inhaler technique to people with
COPD when they have been prescribed an inhaler. Healthcare professionals
ensure that they assess the person's inhaler technique when starting
treatment and regularly during their treatment.

**Commissioners** (clinical commissioning groups) ensure that they
commission services in which people with COPD who are prescribed an
inhaler are trained and assessed in the correct inhaler technique when
they start treatment, and have their technique reassessed regularly
during their treatment.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers {.title}

**People with COPD** who are given an inhaler have a check to make sure
that they can use it correctly when they start treatment and at least
once a year at their annual review. They should also have a check if
their treatment changes or after a sudden flare up of their symptoms
(called an acute exacerbation).

### Source guidance {.title}

-   [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
    disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (2010) NICE
    guideline CG101, recommendations 1.2.2.13, 1.2.2.14 and 1.3.11.2

### Equality and diversity considerations {.title}

Elderly people, or people with learning disabilities, physical
disabilities or cognitive impairment may experience difficulties
learning and retaining the adequate inhaler technique to ensure that
they get the optimal treatment dose. An individual patient assessment
should be carried out before choosing the most appropriate device for
delivery of inhaled therapy.


