Quality statement 1: Diagnosis with spirometry {.title}
----------------------------------------------

### Quality statement {.title}

People aged over 35 years who present with a risk factor and one or more
symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have
post‑bronchodilator spirometry. **[2011, updated 2016]**

### Rationale {.title}

A diagnosis of COPD is confirmed by post‑bronchodilator spirometry. To
ensure early diagnosis, spirometry should be done in primary care when a
person presents with a risk factor for COPD (which is usually smoking)
and one or more symptoms of COPD.

### Quality measures {.title}

#### Structure {.title}

​a) Evidence of local arrangements and written clinical protocols to
ensure that people aged over 35 years presenting with a risk factor and
one or more symptoms of COPD have post‑bronchodilator spirometry.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​b) Evidence of local arrangements and written clinical protocols to
ensure that healthcare professionals in primary care using
post‑bronchodilator spirometry are trained and competent in its use.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​c) Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that primary care services
providing post‑bronchodilator spirometry are supported by quality
control processes.

***Data source:*** Local data collection.

#### Process {.title}

Proportion of people aged over 35 years presenting with a risk factor
and one or more symptoms of COPD who have post‑bronchodilator
spirometry.

Numerator – the number in the denominator who have post‑bronchodilator
spirometry.

Denominator – the number of people aged over 35 years presenting with a
risk factor and one or more symptoms of COPD.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. [Quality and Outcomes
Framework](http://bma.org.uk/practical-support-at-work/contracts/independent-contractors/qof-guidance)
indicator COPD002: The percentage of patients with COPD in whom the
diagnosis has been confirmed by post‑bronchodilator spirometry between 3
months before and 12 months after entering on to the register.

#### Outcome {.title}

COPD incidence.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners {.title}

**Service providers** (primary care services) ensure that
quality‑assured post‑bronchodilator spirometry is carried out in people
aged 35 years and over who have a risk factor and one or more symptoms
of COPD, to confirm diagnosis of COPD. Service providers ensure that
healthcare professionals are trained and competent in performing and
interpreting post‑bronchodilator spirometry.

**Healthcare professionals** (in primary care services) ensure that they
perform quality‑assured post‑bronchodilator spirometry in people aged 35
years and over who have a risk factor and one or more symptoms of COPD,
to confirm diagnosis of COPD. Healthcare professionals ensure they
remain up to date with training and competencies in performing and
interpreting post‑bronchodilator spirometry.

**Commissioners** (clinical commissioning groups) ensure that they
commission services in which people aged 35 years and over who present
with a risk factor and one or more symptoms of COPD receive
quality‑assured post‑bronchodilator spirometry to confirm a diagnosis of
COPD.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers {.title}

**People aged 35 or older** who have an increased risk of COPD and who
have one or more symptoms of COPD are offered a test to check how well
their lungs work (called post‑bronchodilator spirometry). This test is
used to diagnose COPD. People are at an increased risk of COPD if they
smoke or have smoked in the past, or if they have been exposed to
harmful fumes, dust or chemicals, often at work. Symptoms of COPD
include breathlessness, long‑lasting cough, coughing up phlegm, frequent
winter 'bronchitis' and wheezing.

### Source guidance {.title}

-   [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
    disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (2010) NICE
    guideline CG101, recommendations 1.1.1.1, 1.1.2.2, 1.1.2.4 (key
    priorities for implementation) and 1.1.2.6.

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement {.title}

#### Risk factors {.title}

Risk factors for COPD include:

-   smoking history

-   occupational exposure to harmful fumes, dust or chemicals

-   exposure to fumes, such as biomass fuels.

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)
and expert opinion]

#### Symptoms of COPD {.title}

Symptoms of COPD are:

-   exertional breathlessness

-   chronic cough

-   regular sputum production

-   frequent winter 'bronchitis'

-   wheeze.

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)
recommendation 1.1.1]

#### Post‑bronchodilator spirometry {.title}

Post‑bronchodilator spirometry is used to identify abnormalities in lung
volumes and air flow. Spirometry should be performed by a healthcare
professional who has had appropriate training and who has up‑to‑date
skills. The use of post‑bronchodilator spirometry should be supported by
quality control processes.

[Adapted from [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)
recommendations 1.1.2.5 and 1.1.2.6]


