Quality statement 6: Emergency oxygen during an exacerbation {.title}
------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement {.title}

People receiving emergency oxygen for an acute exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have their oxygen saturation levels
maintained between 88% and 92%. **[new 2016]**

### Rationale {.title}

During an exacerbation, people with COPD may experience a worsening of
gas exchange in the lungs, which can lead to low blood oxygen levels.
Emergency oxygen is often given during the treatment of an exacerbation,
either in the community, during transfer to hospital in an ambulance or
while being assessed at hospital.

In some people, uncontrolled oxygen therapy may reduce the depth and
frequency of breathing, leading to a rise in blood carbon dioxide levels
and a fall in the blood pH (acidosis). Controlled oxygen therapy must
therefore be administered by a delivery device and at a flow rate that
helps the oxygen saturation to be maintained between 88% and 92%.

### Quality measures {.title}

#### Structure {.title}

Evidence of local arrangements and written clinical protocols to ensure
that people receiving emergency oxygen for an acute exacerbation of COPD
have their oxygen saturation levels maintained between 88% and 92%.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

#### Process {.title}

Proportion of people receiving emergency oxygen for an acute
exacerbation of COPD who have their oxygen saturation levels maintained
between 88% and 92%.

Numerator – the number in the denominator whose oxygen saturation levels
are maintained between 88% and 92%.

Denominator – the number of people with an acute exacerbation of COPD
receiving emergency oxygen.

#### Outcome {.title}

​a) Frequency of non‑invasive ventilation due to oxygen toxicity.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​b) Morbidity rates.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners {.title}

**Service providers** (community and secondary care services, ambulance
trusts, A&E departments) ensure that devices and flow rates are used to
enable oxygen saturation levels to be maintained between 88% and 92% in
people receiving emergency oxygen for an acute exacerbation of COPD.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure that devices and flow rates are used
to enable oxygen saturation levels to be maintained between 88% and 92%
in people receiving emergency oxygen for an acute exacerbation of COPD.

**Commissioners** ensure that they commission services that use devices
and flow rates to enable oxygen saturation levels to be maintained
between 88% and 92% in people receiving emergency oxygen for an acute
exacerbation of COPD.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers {.title}

**People with COPD who need emergency oxygen because of a sudden flare
up of their symptoms (called an acute exacerbation)** receive the
correct amount of oxygen to keep the oxygen levels in their blood at a
safe level.

### Source guidance {.title}

-   [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
    disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (2010) NICE
    guideline CG101, recommendation 1.3.6.2

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement {.title}

#### Acute exacerbation {.title}

An exacerbation is a sustained worsening of a person's symptoms from
their stable state beyond usual day‑to‑day variations and is acute in
onset. Commonly reported symptoms are: worsening breathlessness, cough,
increased sputum production and change in the colour of the sputum.

[Adapted from [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)]


