Quality statement 7: Non‑invasive ventilation {.title}
---------------------------------------------

### Quality statement {.title}

People with an acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and persistent acidotic hypercapnic ventilatory failure
that is not improving after 1 hour of optimal medical therapy have
non‑invasive ventilation. **[2011, updated 2016]**

### Rationale {.title}

Non‑invasive ventilation is used to treat persistent hypercapnic
ventilatory failure and acidosis during an exacerbation of COPD, when a
person's arterial blood gases (especially the pH and carbon dioxide
levels) are not responding (or worsening) despite optimal medical
management. Non‑invasive ventilation should be delivered in a dedicated
setting by staff trained and experienced in its use because of safety
concerns with using the equipment.

### Quality measures {.title}

#### Structure {.title}

Evidence of local arrangements to ensure that people with an acute
exacerbation of COPD and persistent acidotic hypercapnic ventilatory
failure that is not improving after 1 hour of optimal medical treatment
have non‑invasive ventilation.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

#### Process {.title}

Proportion of people with an exacerbation of COPD and persistent
acidotic hypercapnic ventilatory failure that is not improving after 1
hour of optimal medical treatment who have non‑invasive ventilation.

Numerator – the number in the denominator who have non‑invasive
ventilation.

Denominator – the number of people with an acute exacerbation of COPD
and persistent acidotic hypercapnic ventilatory failure that is not
improving after 1 hour of optimal medical therapy.

#### Outcome {.title}

Mortality rates.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners {.title}

**Service providers** (secondary care services and A&E departments)
ensure that people with an acute exacerbation of COPD and persistent
acidotic hypercapnic ventilatory failure that is not improving after 1
hour of optimal medical treatment have non‑invasive ventilation.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure that people with an acute
exacerbation of COPD and persistent acidotic hypercapnic ventilatory
failure that is not improving after 1 hour of optimal medical treatment
have non‑invasive ventilation. Healthcare professionals are trained and
experienced in using non‑invasive ventilation.

**Commissioners** (clinical commissioning groups) ensure that they
commission services in which people with an acute exacerbation of COPD
and persistent acidotic hypercapnic ventilatory failure that is not
improving after 1 hour of optimal medical treatment have non‑invasive
ventilation.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers. {.title}

**People with COPD who have 'ventilatory failure' during a sudden flare
up of their symptoms (called an acute exacerbation)**are given an
emergency treatment called non‑invasive ventilation if they do not
improve after 1 hour of treatment with medicine and oxygen. Ventilatory
failure happens when a person can't breathe deeply enough and waste
carbon dioxide builds up in the blood causing acid to form. Non‑invasive
ventilation involves wearing a mask connected to a machine that pumps
oxygen into the lungs.

### Source guidance {.title}

-   [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
    disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (2010) NICE
    guideline CG101, recommendation 1.3.7.1

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement {.title}

#### Acute exacerbation {.title}

An acute exacerbation is a sustained worsening of a person's symptoms
from their stable state, and which is beyond usual day‑to‑day variations
and acute in onset. Commonly reported symptoms are worsening
breathlessness, cough, increased sputum production and change in sputum
colour.

[Adapted from [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)]

#### Persistent acidotic hypercapnic ventilatory failure {.title}

Acute acidotic hypercapnic respiratory failure results from an inability
of the respiratory system to provide sufficient alveolar ventilation to
maintain a normal arterial PCO2 and blood pH level. Co‑existent
hypoxaemia is usually mild and easily corrected. Conventionally, a pH
\<7.35 and a PCO2 \>6.5 kPa, persisting after initial medical therapy,
define acute respiratory acidosis and have been used as threshold values
for considering the use of non‑invasive ventilation. More severe degrees
of acidosis, such as pH \<7.25, have been used as a threshold for
considering provision of invasive mechanical ventilation.

[Adapted from [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)
and expert consensus]

#### Non‑invasive ventilation {.title}

Non‑invasive ventilation is a method of providing ventilatory support
that does not require an endotracheal tube. It is usually delivered
through a mask that covers the nose or a mask covering the nose and the
mouth.

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)]

Non‑invasive ventilation should be given once it is recognised that a
person is not responding to 1 hour of optimal medical therapy.

[Expert consensus]

#### Optimal medical treatment {.title}

Controlled oxygen therapy, nebulised bronchodilator therapy, systemic
corticosteroids and antibiotics if indicated, in line with the NICE
guideline on [chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101).

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)]


