Quality statement 5: Pulmonary rehabilitation after an acute exacerbation {.title}
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement {.title}

People admitted to hospital for an acute exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) start a pulmonary rehabilitation
programme within 4 weeks of discharge. **[2011, updated 2016]**

### Rationale {.title}

Starting a pulmonary rehabilitation programme within 4 weeks of hospital
discharge after an acute exacerbation reduces the short‑term risk of
hospital readmission, and improves the quality of life and the
short‑term exercise capacity of people with COPD.

### Quality measures {.title}

#### Structure {.title}

Evidence of local arrangements and written clinical protocols to ensure
that people with COPD admitted to hospital for an acute exacerbation
start a pulmonary rehabilitation programme within 4 weeks of discharge.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit Programme: pulmonary rehabilitation clinical audit
and organisational
audit.](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/pulmonary-rehabilitation-workstream)

#### Process {.title}

Proportion of people discharged from hospital after an acute
exacerbation of COPD who start a pulmonary rehabilitation programme
within 4 weeks of discharge.

Numerator – the number in the denominator who start a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme within 4 weeks of discharge.

Denominator – the number of people discharged from hospital after an
acute exacerbation of COPD.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit Programme: pulmonary rehabilitation clinical
audit](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

#### Outcome {.title}

​a) Hospital admissions for acute exacerbations.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​b) Quality of life.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​c) Exercise capacity.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit Programme: pulmonary rehabilitation clinical
audit](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners {.title}

**Service providers** (secondary care and community services) ensure
that systems are in place for people admitted to hospital for an acute
exacerbation of COPD to start a pulmonary rehabilitation programme
within 4 weeks of discharge.

**Healthcare professionals** ensure that people admitted to hospital for
an acute exacerbation of COPD are referred for and receive a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme within 4 weeks of discharge.

**Commissioners** (clinical commissioning groups) ensure that they
commission services in which people who are admitted to hospital for an
acute exacerbation of COPD are referred for and receive a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme within 4 weeks of discharge.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers {.title}

**People with COPD who have had a hospital stay because of a sudden
flare up of their symptoms (called an acute exacerbation)** start a
pulmonary rehabilitation programme within 4 weeks of leaving hospital.
This includes exercises, information about COPD, diet advice and support
depending on the person's needs.

### Source guidance {.title}

-   [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
    disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (2010) NICE
    guideline CG101, recommendation 1.2.8.1

-   British Thoracic Society (2013) [Guideline for pulmonary
    rehabilitation in
    adults](https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/guidelines-and-quality-standards/pulmonary-rehabilitation-guideline/),
    Post‑exacerbation pulmonary rehabilitation page ii15, paragraph 6

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement {.title}

#### Acute exacerbation {.title}

An exacerbation is a sustained worsening of a person's symptoms from
their usual stable state and which is beyond usual day‑to‑day variations
and acute in onset. Commonly reported symptoms are: worsening
breathlessness, cough, increased sputum production and change in sputum
colour.

[Adapted from [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)]

Exercise capacity and physical activity levels are impaired during and
after an exacerbation, contributing to skeletal muscle dysfunction,
particularly of the lower limbs.

[Adapted from British Thoracic Society [Guideline for pulmonary
rehabilitation in
adults](https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/guidelines-and-quality-standards/pulmonary-rehabilitation-guideline/)]

#### Pulmonary rehabilitation programme {.title}

A multidisciplinary programme of care for people with chronic
respiratory impairment that is individually tailored and designed to
optimise each person's physical and social performance and autonomy.

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)
and British Thoracic Society [Guideline for pulmonary rehabilitation in
adults](https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/guidelines-and-quality-standards/pulmonary-rehabilitation-guideline/)]

Pulmonary rehabilitation programmes should be held at times that suit
people with COPD and in locations that are easy for people with COPD to
get to, and have good access for people with disabilities. Programmes
should be available within a reasonable time from referral.

[Adapted from [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) NICE guideline CG 101
recommendation 1.2.8.3]

Programmes comprise individualised exercise programmes and education,
and:

-   are at least 6 weeks in duration and include a minimum of
    twice‑weekly supervised sessions

-   include supervised, individually tailored and prescribed,
    progressive exercise training including both aerobic and resistance
    training

-   include a defined, structured education programme.

[British Thoracic Society [Guideline for pulmonary rehabilitation in
adults](https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/guidelines-and-quality-standards/pulmonary-rehabilitation-guideline/)]

### Equality and diversity considerations {.title}

Pulmonary rehabilitation is not suitable for people with unstable
cardiac disease, locomotor or neurological difficulties precluding
exercise such as severe arthritis or peripheral vascular disease, and
people in a terminal phase of an illness or with significant cognitive
or psychiatric impairment.

Some people with COPD may not be well enough to attend a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme within 4 weeks of an acute exacerbation, may
not have attended hospital after an acute exacerbation of COPD or may
not have been admitted to hospital after their exacerbation of COPD.


