Quality statement 4: Pulmonary rehabilitation for stable COPD and exercise limitation {.title}
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Quality statement {.title}

People with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
exercise limitation due to breathlessness are referred to a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme. **[2011, updated 2016]**

### Rationale {.title}

Pulmonary rehabilitation programmes improve a person's exercise
capacity, quality of life, symptoms and levels of anxiety and
depression.

### Quality measures {.title}

**Structure**

Evidence of local arrangements and written clinical protocols to ensure
that people with stable COPD and exercise limitation due to
breathlessness are referred to a pulmonary rehabilitation programme.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit Programme: pulmonary rehabilitation clinical audit
and organisational
audit.](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/pulmonary-rehabilitation-workstream)

#### Process {.title}

​a) Proportion of people with stable COPD and exercise limitation due to
breathlessness who are referred to a pulmonary rehabilitation programme.

Numerator – the number in the denominator who are referred to a
pulmonary rehabilitation programme.

Denominator – the number of people with stable COPD and exercise
limitation due to breathlessness.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit Programme: pulmonary rehabilitation clinical
audit.](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/pulmonary-rehabilitation-workstream)

​b) Proportion of referrals of people with stable COPD and exercise
limitation due to breathlessness that result in the person attending a
pulmonary rehabilitation programme.

Numerator – the number in the denominator that result in the person
attending a pulmonary rehabilitation programme.

Denominator – the number of referrals of people with stable COPD and
exercise limitation due to breathlessness to pulmonary rehabilitation
programmes.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit Programme: pulmonary rehabilitation clinical
audit.](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-pulmonary-rehabilitation-workstream)

​c) Proportion of attendances of people with stable COPD and exercise
limitation due to breathlessness that result in the person completing a
pulmonary rehabilitation programme.

Numerator – the number in the denominator that result in the person
completing a pulmonary rehabilitation programme.

Denominator – the number of attendances of people with stable COPD and
exercise limitation due to breathlessness at pulmonary rehabilitation
programmes.

***Data source:*** Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit Programme: pulmonary rehabilitation clinical
audit.](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-pulmonary-rehabilitation-workstream)

#### Outcome {.title}

​a) Hospital admissions for acute exacerbation.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​b) Quality of life.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

​c) Exercise capacity.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit Programme: Pulmonary rehabilitation clinical
audit.](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/pulmonary-rehabilitation-workstream)

​d) GP attendances.

***Data source:***Local data collection. Royal College of Physicians'
[National COPD Audit
Programme](https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/national-copd-audit-programme-starting-2013).

### What the quality statement means for service providers, healthcare professionals and commissioners {.title}

**Service providers** (secondary care and community services) ensure
that systems are in place for people with stable COPD and exercise
limitation due to breathlessness to be referred to a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme.

**Healthcare professionals** refer people with stable COPD and exercise
limitation due to breathlessness are referred to a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme.

**Commissioners** (clinical commissioning groups) ensure that they
commission services in which people with stable COPD and exercise
limitation due to breathlessness are referred to a pulmonary
rehabilitation programme.

### What the quality statement means for patients, service users and carers {.title}

**People with COPD that is stable and who have difficulty walking and
have to walk slowly and stop often or soon become breathless,** are
referred to a pulmonary rehabilitation programme. This includes
exercises, information about COPD, diet advice and support depending on
the person's needs.

### Source guidance {.title}

-   [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
    disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (2010) NICE
    guideline CG101, recommendation 1.2.8.2

### Definitions of terms used in this quality statement {.title}

#### Exercise limitation {.title}

Medical Research Council dyspnoea scale of breathlessness grade 3 and
above. A breathlessness of grade 3 is defined as 'walks slower than
contemporaries on level ground because of breathlessness, or has to stop
for breath when walking at own pace'.

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)]

#### Pulmonary rehabilitation programme {.title}

A multidisciplinary programme of care for people with chronic
respiratory impairment that is individually tailored and designed to
optimise each person's physical and social performance and autonomy.

[[Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG101)
and British Thoracic Society [Guideline for pulmonary rehabilitation in
adults](https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/guidelines-and-quality-standards/pulmonary-rehabilitation-guideline/)]

Pulmonary rehabilitation programmes should be held at times that suit
people with COPD and in locations that are easy for people with COPD to
get to, and have good access for people with disabilities. Programmes
should be available within a reasonable time from referral.

[Adapted from [Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease](http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg101) (NICE guideline CG 101)
recommendation 1.2.8.3]

Programmes comprise individualised exercise programmes and education,
and:

-   are at least 6 weeks in duration and include a minimum of
    twice‑weekly supervised sessions

-   include supervised, individually tailored and prescribed,
    progressive exercise training including both aerobic and resistance
    training

-   include a defined, structured education programme.

[British Thoracic Society [Guideline for pulmonary rehabilitation in
adults](https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/guidelines-and-quality-standards/pulmonary-rehabilitation-guideline/)]

### Equality and diversity considerations {.title}

Pulmonary rehabilitation is not suitable for people with unstable
cardiac disease, locomotor or neurological difficulties precluding
exercise such as severe arthritis or peripheral vascular disease, and
people in a terminal phase of an illness or with significant cognitive
or psychiatric impairment.


